07. Implied Volatility 2 — revised transcript

Editorial note: Obvious speech-recognition errors, punctuation, capitalization,
and finance-specific terms have been corrected. Timestamps and substantive
content are preserved; unclear source wording has not been invented.

Speaker 1  00:00:05
Hi guys and welcome to video seven, so in the last video, anton talked about the volatility index for the S&P 500, known as the VIX and, and the VIX index is calculated by deriving expected volatility values from both puts and calls on the S&P 500 and with an average term of about thirty days to expire it, and these expected volatility values known as implied volatilities can be calculated from any asset that you obtain options data for.
Speaker 1  00:00:35
And so in this video we're going to take a closer look at how you can back out implied volatilities from option prices on us listed equities, and in fact, you can use this same methodology to calculate implied volatilities for any assets that you can obtain options data for, so previously in the video series, we looked at calculating realized volatility, which can of course be referred to as a historical volatility, because those values are derived from historical asset prices.
Speaker 1  00:01:06
Now what we're going to do is get a little bit more sophisticated, take things a step further by looking at implied volatility, which is a forward-looking measure rather than a historical one, and to understand why that's the case you need to know a little bit more about options, and options are basically derivative products, meaning that their prices are based on the price of an underlying asset. So for example, you can buy and sell options on single equities like amazon or apple stock and their prices fluctuate based on a number of pricing inputs, one of which, of course.
Speaker 1  00:01:40
Is the price of the underlying asset and another is actually the time to expiry for the option and almost all of the inputs required to price an option are pretty easily defined apart from one which is an estimate and that estimate is the assumed value of volatility for the underlying asset over the duration of the option, so if we can work out, what that number is, then we can obtain a forward-looking estimate of volatility of the underlying stock or asset. And none of this is actually particularly difficult.
Speaker 1  00:02:13
And it's all going to become a lot clearer as we go through the video, so don't worry too much if you're not following just yet, and you might actually be asking at this stage. Why would? Why would even bother calculating implied volatility rather than just using realized volatility?
Speaker 1  00:02:28
Well, you can just use realized volatilities we've discussed in the previous videos. But the advantage that implied volatility has to put it simply is that the implied volatility values derived from market option prices are much more accurate and specific measures of volatility since they're forward-looking estimates and they explicitly define the period over which that future volatility is expected and realized volatility on the other hand is less accurate, because the values are based only on the historical data we examine so with that out the way.
Speaker 1  00:03:03
Let me tell you what we're going to do and what we're going to cover in the rest of this video. Firstly, I'm going to introduce you to an implied volatility calculator, spreadsheet, which you'll be able to access in the downloads area for this video. I'll then be using that calculator throughout the video to show you examples of how to obtain implied volatility values for various equities, and we'll then assess those values in compare them with their realized volatilities that we've looked at in previous videos.
Speaker 1  00:03:31
And finally to wrap things up, I'm going to go over all the important points that we've kind of learned throughout the video so that you can look back on it and understand how you can use this knowledge going forward. Okay, so let's get started. What you guys can see in front of you now is a spreadsheet that we are going to be using throughout the rest of the video, and you guys don't need to worry about recreating this spreadsheet. It's going to be available in the download area for this video, so you guys can easily access it and use it to carry out the steps we go through in this practical once you open the spreadsheet.
Speaker 1  00:04:06
There's going to be four separate worksheets within it, three of them are implied volatility calculators and, one is called a summary worksheet, which we are just going to use towards the end of the video to summarize the information we've gone through the reason why you need three implied volatility calculators in this spreadsheet is is because it depends on which options that you're looking at as to which calculator you're going to end up using, so for example. Whether the options you're looking at are American or European in exercise style.
Speaker 1  00:04:38
And whether the underlying pays dividends or not and how it pays those dividends is going to change, which implied volatility calculator you use and you don't need to worry too much about this right now, because as we go through the video, it's all going to become clear, and I'll explain things as we progress.
Speaker 1  00:04:55
Now the idea of these calculators is that if we reverse engineer the option prices that we see in the market using an options calculator, then we can figure out what values of volatility the market's assuming for the underlying stock, given that we know all of the other inputs which are fixed and known inputs in an option pricing model, and so that's where implied volatility actually gets its name. It's because we are implying it from option prices that we see in the market.
Speaker 1  00:05:26
So if you have a look over to the top right of this sheet, that I'm on here, you'll see that I've written out a very simplified version of how an implied volatility calculator works, and when we look at an option-pricing model for any option, we basically have A bunch of known inputs. Known pricing, inputs plus one unknown pricing input, which is our volatility of the underlying equating in some way to an option price that we can actually observe in the market and unfortunately with these pricing models, they aren't actually as simple as A + B = C so we can't just rearrange them and solve for our volatility value with some basic algebra.
Speaker 1  00:06:07
But we can do is is find this value of volatility by changing it and changing it ah until our option price our model option price actually matches the price that we observe in the market, and then we get to our implied volatility value, and that is exactly what this spreadsheet does on an automated basis. So let me talk you through some of the other areas of these implied volatility calculators before we go any further and and you'll notice that with all three calculators they are laid out in a very similar fashion. So I'm just going to go through one of them, and you'll be able to apply that knowledge across the others.
Speaker 1  00:06:48
So to start with in the top left, we've got an orange section, and that's where we have all of our option pricing inputs, which are written in red and the cells that we need to input values into are colored in light orange, and we do sometimes need to make a manual change to this volatility number in purple here, but I'll, I'll make a note of that later, and some of the inputs that you need to put into the spreadsheet aren't strictly option pricing inputs. But we still need to know them to run the calculation next. We've got the notes area on the top, right?
Speaker 1  00:07:23
That's just going to give you a reminder of what options work within each calculator, so I'll also talk through that in this video, but that's there as an extra reminder when you do some of this stuff yourselves, and also, I've put in some resources to help you guys at the bottom of each sheet, which will just give you links to various different websites where you can find information on options and pricing inputs and so on. And you'll see how we utilize that section as we go through the video.
Speaker 1  00:07:56
Just remember here that the idea is to obtain an implied volatility value by iteratively changing that volatility assumption until our model price matches our observed, option price that we see in the market so for the rest of the video I'm going to take you through several equity examples to show you the specific practical steps that you'll need to carry out to obtain values of implied volatility and then we'll look at all of those values and assess them towards the end of the video.
Speaker 1  00:08:28
So let's start by looking at Microsoft and the first stage of the process is to find the preliminary information that we need to know to define the option calculator that we are going to use in the spreadsheet, so we need to know is what the exercise style of the option that we are going to look at is and also whether the underlying pays dividends or not and to find out the exercise style of the options first. You'll need to know where they're actually listed and then search around the listing exchange's website for something called option specifications.
Speaker 1  00:09:00
Now since most us options are listed on CBOE, so chicago board options exchange, we can use that website in this example to find out the options specifications that we need.
Speaker 2  00:09:11
Right.
Speaker 1  00:09:12
So if you go to your web browser and navigate to the CBOE website, that's CBOE. Com, you can find the option specifications in the products menu and then single stock options menu and then from there. Just click on equity options specs this page, tells us the specifications of exchange traded options on CBOE and the information that we are looking out for here is the exercise style of the option specifically whether they're American or European in style.
Speaker 1  00:09:48
Now this terminology often leads to a bit of confusion amongst retail traders actually, but the terms American and European have nothing to do with the geography of where the option is treated, but instead American options are options that can be exercised at any time, whereas European style options can only be exercised at expiry, so if we scroll down the page. We'll see here a in bold a title for exercise style and quite clearly it says that these options are American in exercise style, and that's going to be the same for all exchange traded equity options on CBOE.
Speaker 1  00:10:27
But if you are looking at options listed elsewhere, you'll need to find a page on that exchange website like this that tells you the exercise style of the options that you're looking at so, as I said previously, to figure out exactly which calculator we are going to use. We need to know both at the exercise style of the option we found that here and and also whether the underlying asset pays any dividends, so we know the exercise style now.
Speaker 1  00:10:51
So let's find out whether Microsoft pays any dividends go back to the spreadsheet file you will see in the resources section that I've got a few links under the dividend section that can provide you with information about what stocks pay dividends and how they pay them the two that I like to use typically are Dividend. Com and Nasdaq. Com so for this example. I'm just going to click on the Nasdaq. Com link here, and then I'll show you how you can find out information about Microsoft's dividends from here.
Speaker 1  00:11:29
So once this page is loaded up, if you go to the search bar in the top right of the homepage, you can then type in the ticker for Microsoft or any asset that you're looking at so MSFT in this case, and then you should be able to find the asset the top of the list here. You can just click on the company name this takes us in this example to the Microsoft Corporation's common stock home page, and from here we can choose from these menus on the left hand side, one called dividend history.
Speaker 1  00:12:01
And that's just going to give us a bunch of information about dividends, so from here you can see that Microsoft currently pays around a 1.05 percent dividend yield on an annual basis, and we can also see what the details are of, the exact dividends that is paid in the past are. And when you get to this stage, there's really two things that you need to understand firstly whether the stock pays any dividends at all and secondly, if it does, whether a dividend has been announced with an ex-dividend date within the time horizon of the option that we are looking at and if that is the case.
Speaker 1  00:12:38
Then we need to note down the size of the dividend and the ex-dividend date as well as they'll be further inputs that we require to put into our calculator if not, then we can just note down the dividend yield if the stock generally pays a dividend, so in this example for Microsoft, you can see that the latest dividend was announced on. September, the fifteenth twenty, twenty and its ex-dividend date is the November 18, 2020, the payment date is the tenth of december, twenty and the cash amount is $0.56 now for some reference.
Speaker 1  00:13:16
I'm filming this on the twenty eighth of november, twenty twenty, so that's well after the ex-dividend date, and so in this example, we can say that irrespective of the option that we choose later in the video in terms of the expiry day of that option, there will be no specific dividend that's been announced with an ex-dividend date within that time period.
Speaker 1  00:13:39
So for now we'll just take note that Microsoft pays an annual dividend yield of 1.05 percent ah bear in mind here at this stage that you might want to obviously find the option that you're looking at first before going to look at this dividend information, just so that you can make sure that you're lining up the dates correctly when considering the ex-dividend date and the time horizon of your option, but with that information. We can now look back at our spreadsheet and the calculator that we need to use for options that have an American exercise style and pay a dividend yield, but with no discrete dividends in the period.
Speaker 1  00:14:20
And that's going to be the binomial yield calculator, and you can figure that out by reading the notes box in each calculator. And so, now that we know that we can go ahead and find an option, and then plug that options data into the calculator and back out and implied volatility for Microsoft and and when it comes to looking for options, data your best bet, your best place to start really is searching on the website.
Speaker 1  00:14:49
The exchange's website where the options that you're looking for are listed. So in this case, that's going to be CBOE. Com, and I've put a link in the resource section for each calculator to some various different websites where you can get options data and for this example, we're just going to click on the CBOE. Com link and then to find options data from various different assets from this homepage. You need to click on quotes and data at the top and then from that menu click on delayed quotes, and then we just need to type in the ticker for the asset that we're looking for options for so in this box here.
Speaker 1  00:15:26
I'm just going to type MSFT, the ticker for Microsoft and click on submit that then presents us with a page with what is called an options chain which essentially lists all of the available options on the asset that we're looking at and classifies them by whether they're calls or puts and what strike they have, what expires they have, and so on.
Speaker 1  00:15:52
And the first step here that makes sense to do is decide on the expiry date of the option that you want to look at and bear in mind at this point that the implied volatility value that we end up with is going to be computed based on that information. And so implicitly, that's the period that we are going to be estimating. Future volatility for, so I recommend that you pick an expiry that you know you expect to roughly match your expected trading time horizon.
Speaker 1  00:16:19
Now for the examples in this video, I'm just going to be looking for options that expire in about four to six weeks time, and since I'm filming this in late november, twenty twenty, that means I'm going to be looking at January 2021 expiries. So I can click on the january, twenty, twenty one expiry option down here below the options chain, and then you'll see once I click with in that two different option chains are presented in front of me. One for an expiry on the eighth of january, one for the fifteenth of january and rather arbitrarily. I'm just going to pick options that are listed with an expiry on the fifteenth of january.
Speaker 1  00:17:03
So now that we've decided on the expiry date, let's just talk through a little bit more detail how this page is laid out and where you can find different aspects of information at the top of the page you've got, the bid and ask prices for the underlying for Microsoft. You've also got the last price as well and then you've got two options chains or a various number of options chains, probably depending on the month of the expiry that you choose on the left hand side.
Speaker 1  00:17:31
The left hand option chains will be calls the right hand side option chains will be puts in the middle it lists all of the options strike prices and as we've already been through the expires are at the bottom and then also in the middle of the strikes the other thing I think it's worth pointing out at this stage is that when you get options data from CBOE website, it actually already calculates implied volatility values for us.
Speaker 1  00:18:00
Which you can see in these, in these options tables in the iv columns, but we still need to go through the spreadsheet process for a few reasons and firstly that's because the implied volatility value that you see here might not always be available if you're getting your data from other websites or even it might not show up for every different asset that you're looking at on CBOE and secondly. Even if you do get an implied volatility value listed on the website that you're looking, at it's always good to have a sense check or calculate an implied volatility elsewhere, so you can check both values and actually as you'll see as we go through the video.
Speaker 1  00:18:38
It's more useful to calculate implied volatility in these spreadsheet calculators, because then you can take advantage of the analysis components, built into them afterwards as well.
Speaker 1  00:18:48
So let's now pick a suitable option and enter those details into our spreadsheet calculator, and we can back out an implied volatility. Then for Microsoft and you remember earlier that I mentioned that we are going to be looking at calls that are at the money when we are doing this implied volatility analysis, and there's two reasons for that, really, the first is simple and easy to remember and the second is, and this is probably the more important reason is that it's going to make sure that you guys are consistent when you're doing a cross asset implied volatility analysis.
Speaker 1  00:19:23
Because you want to make sure that whenever you're deriving implied volatility from options for various different assets that you're always using the same parameters when you're looking at those options of different assets. So for example, they all they all need to have the same expiry date, they all need to be calls or puts and say the same structure basically, and they all need to have the same strike price in terms of whether it's at the money or a percentage out the money, so just to keep things really simple and consistent, I advise just picking call options for the same expiry when you're doing cross asset analysis and with strikes that are at the money.
Speaker 1  00:20:05
So what does that mean here? We've already said that we're looking at options with an expiry on the fifteenth of january, and if we look at the spot price for the underlying for Microsoft, that's going to be around $215. So the strike price that we're going to look at is going to be 215 that would be at the money, and if we look across into the calls for that expiry date and that strike, then this row is the is the call-option data that we need.
Speaker 1  00:20:38
So now we've got quite a lot of the inputs that we require for our spreadsheet, so we can go ahead and start putting those in if we go back to the spreadsheet, the first option that we need to fill in is the option type, whether it's a call or a put in this case, one means, a call and a minus one means a put so from this drop down menu.
Speaker 1  00:20:58
I'm just going to make sure that one is selected, that represents a call the spot price. If we go back to the CBOE website, we can take either a mid price between the bid and the ask for the underlying, or we can take the last price for this example, I'm just going to use the last price, which is $215.29 and use that as the spot price at the exercise or strike, price is two hundred and fifteen, because it's at the money we chose, the at the money option call option. We can leave the volatility value for now in the purple cell that's going to be the one that changes in the calculation shortly.
Speaker 1  00:21:34
And that's it, and the interest rate we haven't discussed yet, so I'm going to leave that cell blank and we'll come back to it in a few moments, the dividend yield is just going to be one point zero five percent, we found that out earlier, when we looked at the Nasdaq website and the expiry date we've chosen is the fifteenth of january twenty twenty one. So we can enter that into that cell, there cell c thirteen and finally what we need to put in cell c fourteen is the observed option price that we see in the market for the call that we're looking at for the call option that we're looking at.
Speaker 1  00:22:05
So if we go back to our options chain and look across from our strike, our 215 strike on the fifteenth of january into the call options, you'll see that we've got a last price thereof, eight point six seven a bid of eight point five, and an ask of eight point nine dollars. So this is actually where the open interest value comes into play a little bit, typically to make things easy.
Speaker 1  00:22:32
I advise just taking the mid price between the bid and the ask, because then it doesn't really matter about the liquidity of that option so much, but if there is a lot of liquidity for that option and the open interest is high, you could equally use the last available price for that call option as well to put into the spreadsheet but as I said to keep things simple. And consistent I think we'll just choose the mid price between the bid and the ask. So that's going to be $8.70 in this example.
Speaker 1  00:23:04
So that's pretty much all the inputs that we need to calculate implied volatility, the only one remaining is this elusive interest rate number here to put in cell c eleven and the interest rate that you want to put in here is actually something that we call the risk free rate, and that's a bit of a theoretical concept, because no interest rate products are truly risk free, however.
Speaker 1  00:23:28
The closest that we can get to that is probably the interest rate on a short term us treasury, so in the resources section at the bottom of each calculator, I've put a link to the treasury yield curve, the us treasury yield curve and if you click on that, it will open ah the treasury yield curve page and it's got daily data across multiple maturities for us treasuries and if you scroll to the bottom.
Speaker 1  00:23:56
You'll see the last available data in this case on the seventh firft november, and we can pick the shortest term treasury, the one month treasury value which is 0.09 percent and use that as our risk free rate, we go back into the spreadsheet and enter in cell c eleven 0.09 percent.
Speaker 1  00:24:18
So with all that data input, it all we need to do now is run a calculation for implied volatility and Excel actually provides us with a nice little tool that helps us do that, called Solver, so to find Solver you go to data on the ribbon and then you should see a button called Solver over here on the right hand side below this data analysis button and if you don't.
Speaker 1  00:24:41
It's because the Solver add-in isn't installed yet on your version of xl, and that's why I don't have it here, because I want to go through that process with you now, so you can go over to file options and then add-ins and, then manage xl and press and press go.
Speaker 1  00:25:00
And this is where you choose to install the Solver, adding you can just check the box next to Solver add-in and press OK, and once you do that, you should see a button for Solver on the ribbon below data analysis, once that's there, you can just click on it, and that's going to open a new dialogue box with our Solver parameters. And all these parameters are actually preset already in the spreadsheet, so you don't need to worry about changing anything in this dialog box, you can just click solve straight away, but I do want to take a little bit of time, just to explain what this is actually doing and how the calculation works.
Speaker 1  00:25:42
So it what it's doing is changing cell c ten, that is our volatility cell over here, and it's going to change it iteratively until this cell c eighteen is minimized or equals zero. What is this cell c eighteen? Eighteen is the difference between our model option price and our observed market option price, so basically the volatility value is continuously going to change until our model option price matches our observed option price and then because all of the other pricing inputs are known, we know that value for volatility is the implied volatility value in that option for that underlying asset.
Speaker 1  00:26:29
So let's have a go at that now, and just click solve here. So now we've done that a new dialogue box appears with Solver results, and hopefully you'll get something like this that says Solver has converged to the current solution, all constraints are satisfied that basically means that it's found a solution if you don't have something like this, and you've got an error instead, it's probably because you've put your pricing inputs into the spreadsheet incorrectly or possibly because the value in the volatility cell is so far from the implied volatility in the observed option price.
Speaker 1  00:27:05
And if that's the case the way, you can get round that it's just by manually overriding the volatility value in that purple cell to something else, for example, experiment with something higher than something lower like twenty percent than five cent or even, just ten percent to begin with and then go through the same process, and it should fix itself and sort itself out. But this all looks good, so we can press OK, and then we can see here in cell c ten. We have an implied volatility of 28.14 percent for Microsoft.
Speaker 1  00:27:38
So now we've got that value. Let's compare it to the implied volatility value that the CBOE had for this, for this option and the and then I'm going to go on and explain exactly what this implied volatility number is and what it tells us. So if we look back to the CBOE website to the options chains that we are looking at, but previously and look across from our 215 strike for our fifteenth of january calls, we see that the implied volatility value it has here is zero twenty six, which is equal to 27.26 percent back to our spreadsheet we have. A value of 28.14 percent, those values are very close.
Speaker 1  00:28:18
They're never going to be exactly equal because of slight rounding differences in assumptions, and also perhaps slight differences in the models used to calculate them, but that is a good enough sense check those values are definitely very close. Okay, so let me tell you what this number represents and how to analyze it whenever we look at implied volatility from options. It's always in the format of an annualized standard deviation figure, and you've seen standard deviations before when we went through our distribution of returns analysis video.
Speaker 1  00:28:51
And so this number can be used to compare the implied volatility for this asset to its historical realized volatility, but note that I just said previously that the implied volatility figure is an analyzed figure. So it's in which means that if you want to compare it to the daily weekly, monthly, or courtly figures that we worked out in our distribution of returns analysis, then you'll have to convert that figure to those periods first and in these sheets have created a small analysis table where that's all done for you.
Speaker 1  00:29:26
So you can see that our implied volatility value of 28.14 percent, has been copied across to this cell over here, eighty eleven where we've got an annual figure for implied volatility of 28.14 percent, and then all the figures below that for implied volatility have been converted to various timeframes. So we've got quarterly monthly, weekly and daily, like we see in our distribution of returns analysis.
Speaker 1  00:29:50
And if you click into each of these cells for the implied volatility calculation, you'll see that it's just a mathematical formula that basically derives the implied volatility that timeframe from the annualized figure, so if we look at the quarterly equation, the equation it's basically taking the annualized implied volatility and then multiplying it by the square root of one over four, four, because that's a number of quarters in a year. So it's always one over the number of periods in a year, so for example, go down to the monthly equation it will be the same thing.
Speaker 2  00:30:25
Right.
Speaker 1  00:30:25
But multiplied by the square root of one over twelve, because there's twelve months within a year, and that gives you the implied volatility conversion to these various timeframes, and I've also added on another one, which is the implied volatility over the time horizon of the option. So that's just calculated by taking the time from now until option expiry, and then basically running the equation like that, so it's multiplying it by the square root of the number of days to expiry by three hundred and sixty five, which is the same methodology is all the conversions above as well.
Speaker 2  00:31:03
The.
Speaker 1  00:31:04
Also what I've done in this analysis table is take these standard deviation figures and mean zero percent return assumption to imply future ranges of prices for the underlying asset a, given that we expect the underlying asset returns to be normally distributed.
Speaker 2  00:31:23
Right.
Speaker 1  00:31:23
And we've covered the pitfalls of assuming normally distributed returns. But you know, in a circumstance like this, they can still be used as a rough guide, and it just helps us paint a clearer picture of the range of prices that you might typically expect going forward, given the implied volatility value that you've seen in the option that you're analyzing just remember, though, that these values have been converted to different time horizons and the original volatility assumption is for the time horizon of the option.
Speaker 1  00:31:54
So that's just something to bear in mind when you do this analysis, other than that you guys should just be looking at these values in a very similar way as to what we've done previously when we've done other volatility assessments. And that's just in terms of the risk and opportunity across various trading timeframes and assets, and we're going to get on to looking at other assets very shortly.
Speaker 1  00:32:15
But before I move on from this Microsoft example and start comparing Microsoft implied volatility with and employed volatilities from other assets, let me quickly show you what we would have done if we saw a discrete dividend announced and its ex-dividend date was between now and and the expiry of the options o january fifteen t. So if we go over to the binomial discrete implied volatility calculator, you will see that I've put in all the same inputs as we looked at previously in the binomial yield calculator for this Microsoft option, the only difference being that we don't have a dividend yield and instead we have a dividend amount which I've put in here is zero five six dollars.
Speaker 1  00:32:58
That's just the same as the previous quarterly dividend that Microsoft issued, issued and I've put in an ex-dividend date of the fifth of january twenty twenty one, which is just an arbitrary date between now and the expiry date of the option. So I just want to show you that this works in exactly the same way as the other calculators.
Speaker 1  00:33:17
So if we go to Solver on the ribbon within the data tab, and then that will open your Solver Parameters dialogue box again, and all you need to do, is click solve here I have just noticed there's a very, very minor difference between how this is set up in the previous the objective cell here c twenty is set to a value of zero as the objective rather than minimizing. But that'sbasically the same thing, so we don't need to worry about that. You can just click on solve here and hopefully you'll get a solution everything's satisfied in terms of constraints we can press, okay?
Speaker 1  00:33:52
And we've got our implied volatility value, just there, okay? So I just wanted to make sure that was clear, and you know how to use all the calculation sheets before the end of this video. Ah, let's quickly now take note of all the implied volatility values that we computed in the binomial yield calculator for this Microsoft options, and we are going to note them down in the summary worksheet so we can compare them with other assets throughout the video.
Speaker 1  00:34:20
So I'm going to go back to the yield cheat now, and I'm just going to copy these implied volatility values on a quarterly monthly, weekly and daily basis into the summary worksheet, so I'm just clicking on sell ei twelve here. That'squarterly implied volatility.
Speaker 1  00:34:37
I'm copying it with control con the keyboard, then I'm going to go to the summary worksheet and put it in the relevant cell here. So for Microsoft, I'm going to put it in the quarterly implied volatility cell, which is m eight and just paste that as a value, so I'm doing that by right clicking within that cell and then going to paste options and within paste options, I'm going to left click values, which means paste it as a value. The reason why we need to do that is because we don't want to paste it as a formula, because then it will get confused.
Speaker 1  00:35:08
We just want the raw value tha f that formula created on the previous sheet, so let's go ahead and do that for the other time horizons, it will be monthly next. I'm just going to use control c again to copy that cell paste it within the appropriate cell in the summary sheet so l eight, I'm going to right click within that cell and paste it as values again and just do the same for weekly and daily as well.
Speaker 1  00:35:44
Ok, so we've calculated implied volatility for Microsoft and we've converted that annualized figure to daily, weekly, monthly and quarterly values and we've recorded those values in this summary worksheet. What we are next going to do is carry out the same process of calculating implied volatility for other assets, those assets will be Google TREX and OLLI, then we are going to compare all of those implied volatilities with each each other, and also compare them to the historical volatilities for those assets as well, using close-to-close standard deviation volatility values. I've got recorded here in the blue section of this summary worksheet.
Speaker 1  00:36:26
So I just want to note at this stage that all the assets that we are looking at have options that are listed on CBOE, which means that the options have an exercise style that is American that gives us one piece of information that tells us what calculator we can use the other bit of information that we require for each asset is their dividend situation. So we are going to start with Google now and see what that is then we go back to my web browser and go on to the Nasdaq website that we were on previously we were looking at the Microsoft dividend history.
Speaker 1  00:36:57
And I'm just going to type in the top search bar here goog, which is the Google ticker, and then select the option from the drop down menu for Google, and you'll see here when I'm on this Google dividend history page that there is no information that's because Google doesn't pay a dividend. You can obviously check that against other sites, if you wish when you're doing your own analysis for other assets, so that basically means if we go back to our spreadsheet, that we'll be using the Black–Scholes model for Google.
Speaker 1  00:37:26
You can see that and confirm that by reading the notes here in this section, so now we want to do is find an option for Google where we can plug in the inputs in here and calculate an implied volatility, so to do that, we'll go back to the CBOE website back to our quote table for Microsoft and scroll up, and then we'll enter the ticker for Google, instead up here. Goog click submit it, and then that will load up some options chains for Google stock.
Speaker 1  00:37:58
Remember, we are comparing assets, comparing implied volatilities we want to make sure that we're always looking at options with the same expiry, so I'm going to choose january twenty, twenty one wiries again, and then from these two option chains. We want to be picking the fifteenth of jan expiry to make sure it's the same as the Microsoft option that we looked at earlier. We also want to be looking at calls again to keep things the same and we're going to look at a strike that is at the money again, so that these implied volatility values that we end up with are comparable so at the moment googles trading at around 1,793.
Speaker 1  00:38:36
So we'll pick a strike price of 1,795 and call that pretty much at the money. So we'll be using these prices here for the fifteenth of jan call with the 1,795 strike. Let's go back to the spreadsheet now and start putting in some of these inputs.
Speaker 2  00:38:54
Okay.
Speaker 1  00:38:55
So the spot price was at 1,793, roughly the. Strike price is 1,795 will leave the implied volatility assumption to begin with at ten percent the risk free rate is the same as before 0.09 percent, the dividend yield is zero, you only put in a dividend yield on this sheet if the option that you're looking at has a European exercise style. The expiry day is the fifteenth of jan twenty twenty one and the observed option price that we saw in the options chain will take the mid between the bid and the ask which is roughly 69.5.
Speaker 1  00:39:37
So I'll put that into the calculator now, and then all we need to do from here is go to Solver again on the ribbon within the data tab, and then calculate implied volatility by clicking the solve button here. Solver has successfully found a solution we can press OK? And we can see that our implied volatility for Google is 27.42 percent, remember, that's an annualized figure to get that in terms of a quarterly monthly, weekly and daily figure.
Speaker 1  00:40:08
You can look over here into this analysis table, and we're going to copy all of these values across to our summary worksheet. Now so we can store them for some later comparison analysis, so I'm starting with the quarterly value until ab thirteen copying with control c going over to the summary worksheet, I'm going to right click within the appropriate cell m nine in this case and paste as values in the paste options, then we'll just do that for all of the other timeframes. I've got monthly, now weekly and finally daily.
Speaker 1  00:40:51
Let's crack on and carry out the same process for TREX, so we'll go back to our web browser, we'll go to in the Nasdaq website to search for TREX's dividend history. So I'm just putting TREX in the top search bar here, and then I'm going to click on the top option there from the dropdown, we can see that the TRex-dividend history is nonexistent again, because they don't pay A dividend, so we'll be using the same calculator again, which is the Black–Scholes model.
Speaker 1  00:41:19
So if we then go back to the website, we can pick a suitable option scroll up again above the Google option chains that were looking at just before, and I'm going to put in the search box up here, TREX, click submit that will give us option chains for TREX.
Speaker 1  00:41:42
Remember, we want to make sure that we pick the same expiry as we have with the last two stocks Microsoft and Google, so I'm going to click on jan twenty twenty one down here to find the jan twenty twenty one options chains this time. We've only got a fifteenth of january option chain to look at, so we'll be picking a strike here A call with a strike that is at the money if we look at the last price available for TREX. It's 74.64 so close enough to $75 as a strike.
Speaker 1  00:42:14
So this is the call option that we're going to be looking at here and we can plug in that information now into our Black–Scholes model to get implied volatility. So now I'm just going to jump back into the spreadsheet and we'll navigate to the Black–Scholes model sheet, and let's start by deleting all the data that we had here previously for the inputs that we used for Google stock and make sure we changed our implied volatility back to ten percent as a starting value, and then we can put in our fresh inputs for TREX so, the spot price we had or that we observed was 74.4.
Speaker 1  00:42:52
The strike price for the option we're looking at seventy five, the risk free rate is still zero point, zero nine percent, dividend yield, we can put at zero percent or leave blank for the same reasons I said before with Google, and that's only filled out if you have, if you're looking at an option with a European exercise style and, particular calculator, the expiry date is the same fifteenth of jan, twenty twenty one and the observed option price we have if go back to our quote table.
Speaker 1  00:43:22
And look across from our seventy five strike into the call option chain, then we've got a bid of four point one and ask of four point six, so we'll take a mid of four point three there, four point five, and put that into the calculator, that's 4.35 and next we have to do is run the calculation again.
Speaker 1  00:43:49
Because that's all of our inputs entered, so we can go to Solver on the data tab and just click solve it's found a solution we can press and you can see here that we've got an implied volatility value for TREX of 42.28 percent, on an annual basis that figure is translated into other timeframes over here in our analysis table.
Speaker 1  00:44:13
So I'm just going to copy and paste this values, these various implied volatilities over these timeframes into our summary worksheet, as we did before starting with the quarterly value I'm going to press control c with the quarterly implied volatility cell selected to copy it, go to the summary worksheet, paste it in the relevant cell as a value and then do the same for monthly, weekly and daily figure.
Speaker 1  00:44:46
And then finally we can move on to looking at ollie. So let's go and find out the dividend situation for that stock by going back to our web browser, going to Nasdaq. Com and putting the ticker in for Ollie's into the dividend history search box here and selecting the only drop down option we have for that stock that takes us to the OLLI dividend history page and you can see here that again, there is no dividend history because this stock doesn't pay a dividend. So again, we can be using the same calculator as before, which is the Black–Scholes model, let's go and find a suitable option for this stock.
Speaker 1  00:45:27
So I'm going back to the CBOE website to the delayed quote page, and I'm going to type in the ticker for this stock, which is OLLI and click submit and then make sure we are looking at options with the same expires or the equity options that we've looked at previously, so I'm going to click on jan twenty twenty one at the bottom here. And then we've got an option chain for the fifteenth of january and again we are going to choose a call option that is at the money.
Speaker 1  00:45:58
So in this case, at the money means the strike should be as close to ninety one or ninety two as possible, because that's the last price of the underlying here for this stock, so we'll choose 92.5 as are at the money strike or close to at the money strike, and this is the row that be looking at here when we want to put in our observed option price for this option. So let's go back to the spreadsheet again, to the Black–Scholes calculator, delete all the inputs that we had previously and change the implied volatility again to a starting value of ten percent at the spot price that we had was 91.49.
Speaker 1  00:46:41
So I'm going to put that in that cell up there cell c seven, in C8, the strike price for the option we're looking at is 92.5 the risk free rate again is the same as we've been looking at for all of the other stocks. It's 0.09 percent, the one month treasury yields the dividend yield we can leave at zero percent, the expiry day is the fifteenth of january twenty twenty one again, and the observed option price if we go back to our options chain for this stock and look at the ninety two point five strike call for this expiry.
Speaker 1  00:47:15
We have a bit of 6.4, and then ask of seven, so that's going to give us a mid price of 6.7, and we'll put that into our calculator in cell c thirteen. Which is our observed option, price and finally we can go to Solver on the ribbon in the data tab click that and then click solve when the dialog box comes up and that's going to calculate an implied volatility value for OLLI, and the implied volatility value that we have on an annualized basis here is 54.68 percent and again that's translated to other timeframes in the analysis box.
Speaker 1  00:47:55
And we're just going to copy these over again to our summary worksheet now, so starting with the quarterly implied volatility value of copying that cell going to paste it in the row for OLLI stock and put it in the quarterly implied volatility column paste that as value and do the same thing or monthly, weekly and daily as well.
Speaker 1  00:48:28
Ok, we've now got all of our volatility values calculated on both a realized and implied basis and scaled to various time horizons. So let's go through the data now and draw some conclusions. The first thing that we can see clearly here is a continued disparity between mega cap and large cap stocks, like Microsoft and Google, compared to mid-cap stocks like TREX and OLLI. Volatility decreases as market cap increases and as I said in previous videos that makes sense because as companies mature and their cash flows and sales become more stable, that predictability is reflected in stock price movements, but on the other hand.
Speaker 1  00:49:06
If you consider smaller cap companies that are typically higher growth with more leverage and have concentrated sales, there's clearly going to be more risk and hence more volatility in the stock prices of those assets. However, what we keeps saying to you is that the greater volatility means both an increase amount of risk and but also an increased amount of opportunity, and if you do your homework correctly, you're going to be able to take advantage of the opportunity side of that equation, another thing to notice here with this data is the difference between the realized and implied standard deviation values that we have.
Speaker 1  00:49:43
And these are actually aren't too far off each but typically what you're going to find is implied volatility values are much more reliable since the market accounts for more than just the historical price information when pricing options with a certain volatility. There's a bit of a difference here with Microsoft and Google implied volatilities compared to historical volatility values. And that's a reflection of what I just discussed as well, the realized volatility figures in this sheet are calculated from fifty years or so of historical returns, and so Microsoft Google values are elevated the historical volatility values are elevated because ifor a large portion of that time, these companies were smaller cap with higher growth.
Speaker 1  00:50:28
The implied volatility that we see here is much more up to date, and forward-looking, and so it's kind of a more reliable estimate for you guys to use. So all of this in combination should help you gauge profitable opportunities and market and make you start to realize that there's a lot more out there than just mega caps when it comes to trading. And in fact, the smaller cap stocks tend to be where the bigger opportunities lie as well as reinforcing our conclusions on profitable time horizons and assets I've also shown in this video, how you can translate these volatility numbers into indicative price ranges when we assume returns are normally distributed if you wanted.
Speaker 1  00:51:08
You can actually even take that a step further and overlay the real empirical distributions of returns probabilities that we worked out in the distribution of returns analysis videos and use those in combination with the implied standard deviation value that you have of an asset to get a more accurate picture of indicative price ranges. So that's it for this spreadsheet class. We've spent a few videos now building a really solid foundation for understanding individual asset volatilities in subsequent videos.
Speaker 1  00:51:41
What we are going to do is build on that by looking at portfolio volatility, and we're going to see that the portfolio level is not just the indi asset volatilities that matter, but also it's how those asset returns correlate with one another.
